Add blog about how we reduced operational costs (#611)
gardener/documentation: website/blog/2025/04-17-Leaner-Clusters-Lower-Bills.md

*   **Cloud Provider Recommendation Tools:** Tools like AWS Trusted Advisor, Azure Advisor's Cost recommendations, and Google Cloud's machine type rightsizing recommendations provided initial, manual pointers towards obvious inefficiencies like underutilized virtual machines or suboptimal instance types.
*   **Internal Usage Reports:** We generated custom reports detailing our own resource consumption. This helped identify and drive down the number and uptime of development and other non-production clusters. Automating the configuration of Gardener's [cluster hibernation feature](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/usage/shoot/shoot_hibernate.md) or reporting on clusters with poor hibernation schedules further curbed unnecessary spending. These insights are now integrated into the Gardener Dashboard (our GUI).

### The Reserved Instance / Savings Plan Imperative: Planning for Discounts

> Cloud providers offer significant discounts for commitment: Reserved Instances (RIs) on AWS/Azure, Savings Plans (SPs) on AWS/Azure, and Committed Use Discounts (CUDs) on GCP. However, maximizing their benefit requires careful planning, which is not the primary subject of this blog post. Companies typically have tools that generate recommendations from cost reports, suggesting the purchase of new RIs, SPs, or CUDs if on-demand usage consistently increases. Two key learnings emerged in this context though:

Author: Thanks, that was a last minute change I did. You caught it in this very long text. Amazing @n-boshnakov.

## Quick Wins in Networking and Storage

While compute was our main focus, we also addressed significant cost drivers in networking and storage early on.

### Centralized Ingress & Caching

*   **Centralized Ingress:** In Gardener's early days, each shoot control plane had its own Load Balancer (LB), plus another for the reverse tunnel connection to worker nodes (to reach webhooks, scrape metrics, stream logs, `exec` into pods, etc.). This proliferation of LBs was expensive. We transitioned to a model using a central Istio ingress-gateway per seed cluster with a single LB, leveraging SNI (Server Name Indication) routing to direct traffic to the correct control plane API servers. We also reversed the connection direction: shoots now connect *to* seed clusters, and seeds connect *to* the garden cluster. This reduced the need for LBs exposing seed components and enabled *private* shoots or even *private* seeds behind firewalls.

> *   **Registry Cache:** Pulling container images for essential components (like CNI, CSI drivers, kube-proxy) on every new node startup generated significant network traffic and costs. We implemented a [registry cache extension](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-registry-cache), drastically reducing external image pulls (see [Issue #3](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-registry-cache/issues/3)).

Reviewer: You may want to reference the Registry Cache blog post as well: https://gardener.cloud/blog/2024/04-22-gardeners-registry-cache-extension-another-cost-saving-win-and-more/

Author: Absolutely, much better idea. I replaced the issue link with the blog post.

        ```yaml
        spec:
          minReplicas: 3
          maxReplicas: 12
          metrics:
          - resource:
              name: cpu
              target:
                averageValue: 6 # Target 6 cores average usage per pod (Note: String value often required)
                type: AverageValue
            type: Resource
          - resource:
              name: memory
              target:
                averageValue: 24Gi # Target 24Gi average usage per pod
                type: AverageValue
            type: Resource
          behavior: # Fine-tune scaling behavior
            scaleDown:
              policies:
              - periodSeconds: 300
                type: Pods
                value: 1
              selectPolicy: Max
              stabilizationWindowSeconds: 1800
            scaleUp:
              policies:
              - periodSeconds: 60
                type: Percent
                value: 100
              selectPolicy: Max
              stabilizationWindowSeconds: 60
          scaleTargetRef:
            apiVersion: apps/v1
            kind: Deployment
            name: kube-apiserver
        ```
*   **Tune VPA Configuration:**

>     *   We adjusted VPA parameters like `--target-cpu-percentile` / `--target-memory-percentile` (which percentile of historical usage VPA targets) and margin/bound parameters to make VPA less sensitive to tiny spikes and react faster and more accurately to sustained changes.

Author: I'll try. Thank you.

*   **Set Pod Requests:** We always set CPU and memory requests for our containers or let VPA manage those.
*   **Tune Pod Requests:** We systematically processed hundreds of components:
    *   Some deployments were placed under VPA management. Others (very small, below VPA's resolution of ~10m cores / 10Mi memory) were removed from VPA and given static requests.
    *   **"Initial" Requests:** For pods managed by VPA, we set initial requests to the observed P5 (5th percentile) of historical usage. This provides a reasonable starting point for VPA.
    *   **"Static" Requests:** For pods not managed by VPA, we set requests to the P95 (95th percentile). This ensures they generally have enough resources; only exceptional spikes might cause issues, where VPA wouldn't typically help either.

> *   **Quality of Service (QoS):** Prefer the `Burstable` QoS class (requests set, ideally no limits) for most workloads. Avoid `BestEffort` (no requests/limits) as these pods are the first to be evicted under pressure. Avoid `Guaranteed` (requests match limits) as limits often cause more harm than good. See our [Pod Autoscaling Best Practices Guide](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/usage/autoscaling/shoot_pod_autoscaling_best_practices.md#quality-of-service-qos). Pods in the `Guaranteed` QoS class, or generally those with limits, will be actively CPU-throttled and can be OOMKilled even if the node has ample spare capacity. Worse, if containers in the pod are under VPA, their CPU requests/limits often won't scale up appropriately because CPU throttling goes unnoticed by VPA.

Author: My proof reader didn't find those. Thank you!

*   Effective CPU:memory ratio of the workload (more on that later)

### Why Machine Types Matter: Size, Ratios, Generations, and Hidden Constraints

Selecting the right machine type is critical for cost efficiency. Several factors come into play:

*   **Size:** Larger machines generally lead to less fragmentation (less wasted CPU/memory remainder per node) and better overhead efficiency (system components like kubelet/containerd consume a smaller percentage of total resources). However, smaller machines can be better for low-load scenarios while meeting high-availability constraints (e.g., needing to spread critical pods across 3 zones requires at least 3 nodes).
*   **CPU:Memory Ratio:** Cloud providers offer instance families with different CPU:memory ratios (e.g., high-cpu 1:2, standard 1:4, high-memory 1:8). Matching the instance ratio to your workload's aggregate CPU:memory request ratio minimizes waste.
*   **Generations:** Newer instance generations usually offer better performance and, crucially, better price-performance. This can also shift the effective CPU:memory ratio required by the workload due to performance differences.

> *   **Hidden Constraints: Volume Limits:** This proved to be a *major* factor, especially on AWS and Azure. Each instance type has a maximum number of network-attached volumes it can support. Gardener control planes, each with its own etcd cluster requiring persistent volumes for each replica, are heavily impacted. We often found ourselves limited by volume attachments long before hitting CPU or memory limits. *Observation: We noticed ARM-based instances on Azure sometimes support a slightly higher volume attachment count.*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*   **Hidden Constraints: Volume Limits:** This proved to be a *major* factor, especially on AWS and Azure. Each instance type has a maximum number of network-attached volumes it can support. Gardener control planes, each with its own etcd cluster requiring persistent volumes for each replica, are heavily impacted. We often found ourselves limited by volume attachments long before hitting CPU or memory limits.

    > [!NOTE]
    >  We noticed ARM-based instances on Azure sometimes support a slightly higher volume attachment count.
```

## Looking Ahead: Continuous Improvement and Future Optimizations

Cost optimization is an ongoing process, not a one-time fix. We're actively exploring further improvements:

*   **Addressing Load Imbalances:** VPA assigns the same request to all pods in a managed group (Deployment/StatefulSet/DaemonSet). This is inefficient for workloads with inherent imbalances (e.g., controller leaders vs. followers, etcd leader vs. followers, uneven load distribution across DaemonSet pods).
    *   **Request-Based Load Balancing:** For components like the `kube-apiserver`, default connection-based load balancing can lead to uneven load distribution that VPA handles poorly (resulting in over-provisioning for some pods, under-provisioning for others). We have implemented request-based load balancing to distribute load more evenly, allowing VPA to set more accurate requests (see [related work](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/11085)).
    *   **In-place pod resource updates** (a Kubernetes enhancement) would be particularly beneficial in the future, allowing VPA to adjust resources without requiring pod restarts, further improving efficiency and stability.

> *   **Exploring Cilium:** Initial tests suggest switching the CNI from Calico to Cilium could yield 5-10% CPU savings on worker nodes, partly because Cilium can replace kube-proxy, reducing overhead. Memory usage appears similar. Gardener supports Cilium since years.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*   **Exploring Cilium:** Initial tests suggest switching the CNI from Calico to Cilium could yield 5-10% CPU savings on worker nodes, partly because Cilium can replace kube-proxy, reducing overhead. Memory usage appears similar and Gardener has supported Cilium for years.
```

Author: Yeah, reads better. Thank you.

> *   **Exploring Cilium:** Initial tests suggest switching the CNI from Calico to Cilium could yield 5-10% CPU savings on worker nodes, partly because Cilium can replace kube-proxy, reducing overhead. Memory usage appears similar. Gardener supports Cilium since years.

Author: Thank you @ScheererJ.

My main motivation was primarily to let people know, quite generally, that it "may be worth looking around for options for what they have today" to save costs.

In a sense, while this document addresses our own journey and may be of interest primarily to Gardener adopters, I hope it's also interesting to other people, because the problems are fundamentally very similar.

So, if you don't mind, I'll keep further details out and leave it at that (same with ARM - no further details).

But I will change the subject and focus on "getting rid of kube-proxy" through Cilium or Calico's EBPF dataplane as you suggested.
